# Multi-Electron Configurations under LS and Crystal Field Coupling

When we have more than one electron in the outer shell, we need to consider the effect of electron-electron repulsion.  This is a very complicated problem, and we will only delve into examples that show the important cases to applications in spectroscopy with a focus on the transition metals. In a transition metal complex, we need to consider two additional terms to the hydrogenic orbital model for an electron, the electron-electron interactions and the effects of the crystal field.

$$
\hat{H} = \hat{H}_{\text{Hydrogen}} + \hat{H}_{\text{ee}} + \hat{H}_{\text{CF}}
$$

Overall the strength of these interactions are such that they can be treated as perturbations to the hydrogenic orbital model with energetic contributions for the 3d metals ranked as follows:

$$
\hat{H}_{\text{Hydrogenic}} \gg \hat{H}_{\text{ee}} > \hat{H}_{\text{CF}}
$$

with many exceptions proving the rule. This ordering of the terms is important because it allows us to use the hydrogenic orbital model as a starting point and then add in the effects of the electron-electron interactions and subsequently the crystal field as perturbations. We could also add in the effects of spin-orbit coupling as a perturbation, but we will not do that here.

## Understanding Terms Symbols for $d^n$ Configurations

The first step in understanding the effects of electron-electron interactions and the crystal field is to understand the term symbols for the $d^n$ configurations.  In LS coupling, also known as Russell-Saunders coupling, the total angular momentum $\hat{J}$ is set by quantum number $J \in \{(L+S), (L+S)-1, ..., (L-S)\}$. The term symbols are written as:

$$
^{2S+1}L_J
$$

where $S$ is the total spin angular momentum, $L$ is the total orbital angular momentum, and $J$ is the total angular momentum. If $J$ is not given, the values of $J$ are assumed to be degenerate meaning spin orbit coupling is not included. The total number of microstates, N, for a given $d^n$ configuration, n, with 10 possible spin-orbits to choose from, m,  is given by: 

$$
N = m!/(n!(m-n)!)
$$

The term symbols (without $J$) for the $d^n$ configurations are shown in the table below.

| Configuration | Multiplicity | Term Symbols |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| $d^1$ | N = 10 | $^2D$ |
| $d^2$ | N = 45 | $^1S$, $^1D$, $^3P$, $^3F$ |
| $d^3$ | N = 120 | $^2D$, $^2P$, $^4F$ |
| $d^4$ | N = 210 | $^1G$, $^1D$, $^3P$, $^3F$, $^5H$ |
| $d^5$ | N = 252 | $^2D$, $^2P$, $^4F$, $^4D$, $^6H$ |
| $d^6$ | N = 210 | $^1S$, $^1D$, $^3P$, $^3F$, $^5G$ |
| $d^7$ | N = 120 | $^2D$, $^2P$, $^4F$ |
| $d^8$ | N = 45 | $^1G$, $^1D$, $^3P$, $^3F$ |
| $d^9$ | N = 10 | $^2D$ |
| $d^{10}$ | N = 1 | $^1S$ |

## Electron-Electron Interactions

The electron-electron interactions are described by the Coulomb repulsion between electrons.  The Coulomb repulsion is given by:

$$
\hat{H}_{\text{ee}} = \frac{1}{4\pi\epsilon_0}\sum_{i=1}^N\sum_{j>i}^N\frac{e^2}{r_{ij}}
$$

In order to minimize this term, electrons will seek the highest dimensional space available to them.  This is known as Hund's rule.  The effect of this is to maximize the total spin angular momentum, $S$, and also the orbital angular momentum, $L$ if possible.  This is known as the LS coupling scheme. Usually, Hund's rule is stated as:

1. The term with the maximum spin multiplicity is the lowest in energy.
2. If multiple terms have the same spin multiplicity, the term with the maximum value of $L$ is the lowest in energy.
3. The coupling between the spin and orbital angular momentum is such that the total angular momentum, $J$, can lower the energy further by orienting $J = |L-S|$ for less than half-filled shells and $J = |L+S|$ for more than half-filled shells.

### Continuous Symmetry

The term symbols for $d^n$ configurations we have been discussing represent a form of continuous symmetry that defines the electronic degeneracy and energy states in a state influenced by a spherical potential. This spherical symmetry is the group of rotational symmetry of 3 dimensional space: $SO(3)$.  The term symbols are representations of the irreducible representations of $SO(3)$. Our next step is to consider the effects of a discrete crystal field (one of the point groups in 3D space) on the $d^n$ configurations.

### Octahedral Strong Field Case ($d^1 Example)

As a simple, high symmetry example, we consider the case of an octahedral crystal field. The octahedral field will act on the spherical symmetry of the $d$ orbitals and break the 10-fold degeneracy of the $^2D$ configuration into irreducible representations of the group $O_h$. Since we are interested in the d-orbitals, and their angular momentum, let's use a spherical basis set and isolate the angular componenents of the $d$ orbitals.  The spherical harmonics as complex functions are given by:

$$
Y_{lm}(\theta,\phi) = \sqrt{\frac{(2l+1)}{4\pi}\frac{(l-m)!}{(l+m)!}}P_l^m(\cos\theta)e^{im\phi}
$$

For the 3d-orbitals, $l = 2$, and $m \in \{-2, -1, 0, 1, 2\}$ and we can re-write this as:

$$
Y_{2m}(\theta,\phi) = \sqrt{\frac{5}{16\pi}}P_2^m(\cos\theta)e^{im\phi}
$$

where $P_2^m(\cos\theta)$ is the associated Legendre polynomial.  The $d$ orbitals are then given by:

$$
\begin{align}
Y_{2,2}(\theta,\phi) &= \sqrt{\frac{5}{16\pi}}\sin^2\theta e^{2i\phi} \\
Y_{2,1}(\theta,\phi) &= \sqrt{\frac{15}{16\pi}}\sin\theta\cos\theta e^{i\phi} \\
Y_{2,0}(\theta,\phi) &= \sqrt{\frac{15}{32\pi}}(3\cos^2\theta - 1) \\
Y_{2,-1}(\theta,\phi) &= \sqrt{\frac{15}{16\pi}}\sin\theta\cos\theta e^{-i\phi} \\
Y_{2,-2}(\theta,\phi) &= \sqrt{\frac{5}{16\pi}}\sin^2\theta e^{-2i\phi}
\end{align}
$$

We don't care about the radial part of the wavefunction, so we can ignore it. The $\theta$ dependence tells us about the angular momentum of the orbital, and the $\phi$ dependence tells us about the orientation of the orbital. Since we want to know how the orbitals transform, we can use the $\phi$ dependence to determine the irreducible representations of the $d$ orbitals under the $O_h$ group (or just the $O$ group since we just care about rotations). In the form of a vector, the phase of the $d$ orbitals is given by a 5x1 vector of phase factors, $\vec{\phi}$:

$$
\vec{\phi} = \left(\begin{array}{c} e^{2i\phi} \\ e^{i\phi} \\ 1 \\ e^{-i\phi} \\ e^{-2i\phi} \end{array}\right)
$$

From this it can be seen that the forms of the $m_l = \pm 2$ orbitals and $m_l = \pm 1$ orbitals are opposite rotations of the phase factor where $m_l = \pm 2$ has twice the frequency of $m_l = \pm 1$. This means that the $m_l = \pm 2$ orbitals and $m_l = \pm 1$ orbitals form conjugate pairs within the 5-fold degeneracy. These degeneracies will remain intact (i,e. the orbital moment will remain a good quantum number unless the phases cancel (equal population of conjugate orbitals) or the orbitals are mixed by the crystal field.)

Applying our phase vectors to the $O$ group, we can determine the irreducible representations of the $d$ orbitals.  The $O$ group has character table:

$$
\begin{array}{c|c|c|c|c|c}
O & E & 2C_3 & 3C_2 & 6C_4 & 6C_2' \\
\hline
A_1 & 1 & 1 & 1 & 1 & 1 & \\
A_2 & 1 & 1 & 1 & -1 & -1 \\
E & 2 & -1 & 2 & 0 & 0 \\
T_1 & 3 & 0 & -1 & 0 & -1 \\
T_2 & 3 & 0 & -1 & -1 & 1 \\
\end{array}
$$

### Octahedral Strong Field Case ($d^2 Example)




#### Vector Coupling Model for the $(t_2g)^1(e_g)^1$ Configuration

#### Descent of Symmetry Method from $O_h$ to $D_{4h}$ for $(t_2g)^2(e_g)^0$ Configuration